Jay Wayne would go to see anybody about anything to
benefit his program, financially or to help a
student or whatever. It was a pure orientation. It
wasn't to benefit himself in any way. I've not seen
anybody live in a more frugal home. His salary was
not that great. He didn't do it for money. I did it
for power, but power to help students. And so I
respected them. Never, never at any time ever
thought that I would be better off with someone
else in that position. I did think that about a lot
of other positions, but never and never.
I'm not going to ask the negative one. Other than
Wayne Stark, who were described your favorite...
staff, your subordinate colleagues? Oh, I had in
my office starting out, I had Howard Perry and Bob
Melcher. And they were two super, super guys. Of
course, the year later, we added Ormond Simpson.
So I had three Aggies. Oh, and Malin, of course, was
in my office at that time, too. I had four A's to kind
of keep me on a straight and narrow to make sure that
I didn't screw up. They were all wonderful and
different in their own way. Bob Melcher, well, Bob
Melcher and Malin were both seen by the student
body initially as spies. They thought student
leaders that came to see me as soon after I got here.
Was it Melcher and Malin just come around to see
things to tell General Hannigan, and he was in
trouble. What were their nicknames? Oh, God, I
can't, I've forgotten. Malin was the Slink. Yeah.
And was Melcher the Wedge? I've forgotten.
Because according to the students, Malin slinked
around to snoop on
them. Yeah. But those guys in the office... Oh, and
another one. O.L. Luther. O.L. headed up
University Police and O.L. was a former Texas
Ranger. He was a wonderful guy. Terrible
administrator. Just a wonderful human being.
But, so, Tom Parsons. Tom was a good man. I liked
Tom. I enjoyed working with Tom. Tom had a lot of
negative things happen family-wise to him in
terms of his wife and his family. But he was a Texas
Aggie through and through and through. He was a
good administrator. He would do anything to help a
youngster as well. I think Jay Wayne's attitude
You know, that was the same attitude that Ormond
Simpson had, Malin had, and Bob Elcher had, and
Howard Curry had. And people didn't see that, but
that was the cream that came to the top for me. It's
related to those individuals. Now, some who had
that had some difficulties with administrative
kinds of things, and just like O.L., I finally
decided that what we would do was to have Bob
Melcher do the administrative types of things as
it related to University Police. And Orwell would
pick up on the personal relationships and so on. So
you work around that. They were good people, good
human beings. All right. Early on, did you sense
there were any problems that were here when you
arrived that you had to tackle? Quickly. Anything
you had to clean up, straighten up? Not really in
regard to anything that Jim had left behind. I
think the fraternity-sorority thing was
something that we wanted to work on on a continuing
basis at that particular time. Oh. Women in the
Corps, that was the first year. And so that was
something we had to continue to work on.
When you arrived, there were no women in the Corps?
Yet. Tom had integrated that, well he had agreed to
integrate that spring. So it was that first fall
that I was here. Fall of 73. That we had women in the
Corps for the first time. And do you recall how that
went that first fall? Some pluses or minuses? The
interesting thing is that I'm reminded of this
time after time with the Citadel and the
institutions in Virginia. You're going to have
some women who get upset about the manner in which
they're treated. And they're not... My
perception of a female in the Corps of Cadets or in
the military is one that's sort of tomboyish, that
they like the physical kinds of things. And they
handle the Corps well. But there are some who don't
like the physical things, and it's amazing why
they get interested in the Corps, but then are very
resentful. And so way back in the beginning, young
ladies dropping out of the Corps who would really
raise team about what had been done to them. And
that was a continuing thing all the way up until I
retired. And it's still ongoing now. We had a
number of wonderful young ladies. I saw an article
just in the paper the other day about the first
woman who graduated who spent four years in the
Corps at A&M, is retiring as a major. That was in the
newspaper. In Eagle? Well, it was in Eagle within
the past few days. I don't know if it's Eagle. It may
have been in a column. I need to chase her down,
because she'd be a good interview subject.
Let's see. To get back to your question, I really
didn't feel under the gun about anything.
You know, nothing that just stuck its neck out.
Alright, now let's reach out across the campus.
Your key administrative associates outside
Student Life, who were the
key people First of all, we're Tom Cherry,
Clyde Freeman, John Calhoun.
And in talking to John, I decided that the best way
that I could get to know all the economic folks was
to attend his dean's meeting every time. That was
super for me because I got to know everyone. to know
what the institution was all about. In that group,
of course, Frank Huber, strong in education. Fred
Benson, an engineer.
Mac Breska, and the reason I giggle about Mac,
first time I met Mac was by telephone. He called me
and he was fussing about somebody had parked in his
parking place and he wanted the damn police to come
over and pull that damn car out. And so, I went over
to visit with Mac after that and got to know Mac. So,
the Deans, John Pearson in business. Oh golly,
over in Liberal Arts with David... Maxwell.
Maxwell. Veterinary Medicine. George Shelton
and I were hired on the same day by the board and so
George and Ah, George. I can't think of his wife's
name. Joy. I keep thinking of Joy. George and Joy
became good friends and we have remained good
friends ever since.
Oh, geosciences. Earl. Cook. I really liked the
academic beings. You and and Dick were also
included in that particular group. My
relationship I thought was a good one, and I
thought everyone was very kind to me in regard to
helping me understand the institution and all the
programs going on, and were very supportive. So
all that was excellent. And I'm sure that John was
the one that, you know, leader in that, although
you and Dick may have been as well because you all
were super to me too. As far as I was aware,
everything went well when you arrived. We saw
things going smoothly. All right, let's see. Do
you remember any hot
colds rolling out of the fireplace in your early
year or so?
some problem that had to have immediate
attention? Oh, the first one was a crazy one. And
that was
we had the nudes. That first fall, we had the nudes
running around the campus. That became a problem.
I'm trying to think of the slang word.
Not stripping.
So the word we were looking for is streaking. Go
ahead.
That evening that they had the streaking, there
were a few people arrested. And a large number of
students went to the President's house.
I was out of town.
In fact, I was up at East Texas. I'd been invited
back up to Commerce for something. And so Howard
Perry called me. I don't believe that Dr. Williams
ever turned on a light, ever came to the door to
respond. It was dissipated by the University
Police. But there was a picture of an
individual in western garb, normal western
clothing with a rope getting ready to lasso an
individual on a motorcycle who was in the nude. Do
you remember that?
That's the door. That's the
security system on the door. We worked through
that one. That didn't last very long at our campus.
Again, I think When I say our campus is
conservative, I think we have everything that
A&M, that any campus has, any place across the
country. But I think we, in regard to, for example,
like drugs, I think we have fewer that participate
in drugs. I think we always had fewer who would go
off on the deep end on whatever issue. And so
therefore, I think the campus would bounce back to
normal very soon after anything happened. Let's
grab the drug topic. When do you remember drugs
being an item here? Well, it was an item here since I
came. Was it? But it had been an item in East Texas
and it had been an item all over the country. What
were the drugs of choice in your first years? I
think marijuana was the big thing and acid and
stuff that made you high. I can't think of enough.
Not a real strong drug that people would get on. But
yeah, those were problems. The major problem at
A&M forever, and I guess will forever be, is
alcohol. And there are too many things tied in with
tradition in alcohol at A&M, and so therefore,
probably that's the biggest problem. One year
went by, we didn't have an alcohol-related death
one time or another. All right, if you had
omniscient power, omnipotent power also,
all-knowing and all-power, could that be solved?
Alcohol? I don't think it ever will be. I agree. I
think with young people, it's something that they
go through. There are a whole lot of things that you
go through as you're growing up. My feelings about
the students at A&M, no different than East Texas
or wherever, if you can get them through that
period of time without having them destroy
themselves and their lives, then they were going
to be okay after that. But there's going to be some
experimentation in a lot of different things in a
lot of different ways. And if you can just kind of
get them through it without just falling apart
or having them get killed. Can you generalize
about who are the most susceptible drug and or
alcohol students? My perception, to ask you, of
all the kids that came to A&M, those kids whose
parents were too rigid with them at home were the
ones that kind of went off at the extreme when they
came to the campus. Now, that's not objective. I
don't have a whole lot of research on that. But in
talking to lots and lots and lots of students,
those whose parents were too rigid at home kind of
just got off off track when he came. All right,
could you generalize about whether rich or poor,
urban or rural? I think it
was all of those. I think it just, the family being
too rigid about rules and regulations, you know,
be it urban or rural, Catholic, Baptist,
whatever.
They have a tendency to go off on escapades to begin
with, with alcohol. Alright, we start about
streaking. Other problems that you remember in
your first years?
I mentioned women in the Corps. Began to occur the
gays back at that time. gay students would come to
visit with me about the possibility of starting an
organization. So that problem began to... Was
that early? Uh-huh. And it had been a problem at
East Texas before I left there. So that wasn't, so
it wasn't like it was a problem here and not any
place else. I think generally that was beginning
to happen. Do you remember discussing that matter
with Dr. Williams and or the board? Dr. Williams,
not the board, at the beginning.
I felt at that time, because of the state
legislation relating to groups who attempted to
perpetuate those things which were illegal, it
was inappropriate for us as an institution to
recognize those groups. And that was the stance
that I took and recommended to Dr. Williams and the
board as we got into it. were dead against anything
related to women in the band. That was another
women in the band. And that eventually came out of
the St. Brad case, too. The board was opposed to
that. And they did not want a gay student services
organization on campus. Were there, in those
early years, among the board members, were there
any that were more sensitive to these matters than
the others? Any of the board members?
I'd have to. Or I presume the problem was the other
way. It wasn't those who were sensitive. It was
those who were closed. I'd have to go back and think
about each one of the board members. The thing that
comes through loud and clear about that period of
time was Dr. Williams said, relating to those
issues, John, I don't want you dealing with the
board. I'll handle that, and I'll take care of
that. And so I really didn't have those kinds of
discussions with individual board members. And
Dr. Williams kept that, which was good for me and a
good way to have it.
Too often, you get into a bad situation in regard to
conversations that you have with a board member
and saying things that maybe the president didn't
want you to say or whatever, so did I. Did you have
incidents of where board members contacted you or
somebody in your staff directly about many
matters? About housing all the time. Oh, okay.
There, there. Asking for... Uh-huh. And I tried to
take that load off of the president and so I tried to
accommodate everyone that I could. It was just
part of the institution. But that was no different
than former students of any former student who was
looking for help and support and a favor. In those
early years, which board members did you sense,
from your point of view, were the most potent, the
most powerful, the most influential? Well, the
beginning was Clyde Wells. I thought Mr. Wells was
very strong. And in fact, when Dr. Williams
eventually had his heart attack, I thought for a
period of time that Mr. Wells was going to end up as
chancellor of the institution. So he was strong.
He was very, very nice to me. Never pushed in any way
until when
Tom Parsons, I believe, yeah, Tom was...
Tom was the Chief of the University Police, if you
remember, and he was going to retire. Oh
no, it wasn't. If Tom was retiring as the
Commandant, that's what it was. And I had talked to
Dr. Williams about the fact that I wanted Tom to
take over as Chief of the University Police.
Director of Security. I wanted him to be Director
of Security. Because Melcher was retiring and
O.L. was going to be chief of police. I wanted Tom to
be director of security. Jack Williams thought I
was just trying to find a place for Tom Parsons. And
I said, no. Yeah, I argued that Tom was the man. I
thought Tom had Aggie orientation. I thought he
would be supportive. I thought he could learn the
police stuff that he knew. Clyde Wells had a guy up
in Allen, just north of Dallas, an Aggie, that he
wanted me to hire as chief of
police. I went through the interview process my
way, and I hired Tom. But I wasn't unkind to either
Mr. Wells or that guy, and he was a nice person, but
he wasn't what I wanted in that particular
position. So that was the only time Mr. Wells ever
kind of leaned on me a little bit, and it was simply
because he thought this guy would be a good person
for us to have. But the relationship with Clyde
Ross was good. Clyde Freeman, I thought, was in a
strong position
then. And it appeared that Clyde Freeman, for a
while, might be a chance. Of course, he was acting
well while Dr. Williams was down. It's amazing
that John Kellum was never thought to be or the
person for that particular position. And I'm not
sure. Of course, it wasn't privy to all the board
meeting discussions why he wasn't considered.
Let's tackle the women in the Corps matter. Women
were in the Corps at the time you arrived? No, that
fall. Yeah, that fall. Describe how that
progressed, that fall, as you recall.
The decision had been made by Tom and Stan and Dr.
Williams that the women would not be totally
integrated into all of the outfits and that they
would be separated to live in their own dorm. made
it a little bit difficult at the beginning because
had to have male officers for those units. And that
improved as it went along and having female
leadership. So it was male leadership and that
created some problems. Eventually, the fact that
they were not integrated into all the units became
a problem. So we could have solved some problems to
begin with, that we integrated women into all
units. But in retrospect, back at that time and
still, in regard to the difficulties of male and
female, just the natural, normal kinds of
interrelationships,
I would do it the same way. I wouldn't change it.
There comes a time when you can overcome that. with
the female leadership in those positions,
leadership positions. So that was a problem all
that year, in fact for a couple years. Do
you remember any particular incidents, plus or
minus?
The interesting thing about the Corps is that
probably a hell of a lot more things happened than
we ever became aware of. And, you know, years
later, the kids will, the adults will talk about
the things that happened. But I think, for the most
part,
it went, we didn't have a major incident, I'll put
it that way. Major incidents occurred later on,
years to come, but during that first year, no major
incident. And I don't remember of any physical
event where some male physically attempted to do
something to a female. We had, well, the physical
things,
crazy things to the core. shaking hands with an
upperclassman, that some of the male
upperclassmen would not interact with the female
fish. And so that became a problem for us. And when I
say it became a problem for us, it became a problem
for the Corps of Leadership and the Corps of Staff
and civilian staff as well in regard to getting
people to understand we were integrating women
into the Corps in every dimension. They were going
to have to do that or they weren't going to be a part
of the Corps or part of the institution. All right,
the, and the women were in the Corps were all as
freshmen to begin with and gradually moved up.
What was the next threshold after being in the
Corps, what was the next threshold? Fish drill
team? Yeah, that was much, much later, much, much
later. All right, I just want to follow up. But in
thinking now,
one problem we did have that just kind of popped up
in my mind was that the Corps in the past had always
handled discipline themselves and only as it
related to the Corps. After I came, discipline was
a university matter and not just a Corps matter.
And so we had a problem with the military officers,
military staff, of letting us know about
incidents and forwarding those individuals and
their cases to us within the institution. It
wasn't simply a matter that because they were in a
corps, it was a corps matter and
from their perspective, not an institutional
matter. So that became a problem for us and a
problem we struggled with for a number of years
because there was a tendency to believe that if it
happened in the Corps, it ought to be kept quiet and
in the Corps and not handled by the institution. So
we had to work through that. Ron Blanchley was a key
in all of that because Ron was primarily our
disciplinary person back in that particular
time. So that was a major problem that we had to work
through. But in regards to the women, after
leadership positions, then it became
probably it wasn't major item in terms of student
organizations in the Corps until the females
became juniors. And then Ross Volunteers became a
major source of the problem for us because Those
individuals to go into the Ross Volunteers were
selected by upperclassmen. Upperclassmen being
all men had no interest in selecting a female to be a
member of the Ross Volunteers. So probably that
was the, that came on bigger than anything else.
Melanie Zingratt was upset for a number of
reasons. one of which was not the Aggie Band, but as
it played out, she indicated that, in fact, part of
her lawsuit included the Aggie Band, that she had
not been given the opportunity to participate in
the Aggie Band. That was really stretching her
case, I thought, because she really had no
interest in music and the band at that time. But at
least it answered everything for us, and when I say
it answered everything, One of the board members
who was not an Aggie,
and I mentioned his name in private, you've been
out in public. One of the board members said in no
way would he ever allow as long as he was on the
board. He wanted to be in the Aggie band. Now,
Melanie Zantgraff, that's Z-I-N-T-G-R-A-F.